<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 168 (Tuesday, September 1, 2026)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 168 (Tuesday, September 1, 2026)]
[Proposed Rules]
[Pages 56095-56101]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2026-17902]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

National Park Service

36 CFR Part 4

[NPS-WASO-DTS#NPS0042897; PPMPRLE1Y.Y00000. 255P103601]
RIN 1024-AE97


Bicycle Use in Park Areas

AGENCY: National Park Service, Interior.

[[Page 56096]]


ACTION: Proposed rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The National Park Service (NPS) proposes to modify the 
procedural requirements in existing NPS regulations for the designation 
of roads and trails for bicycle use within park areas. The changes 
would align NPS regulations with applicable Federal law and policy, 
remove unnecessary requirements, and ensure public involvement when 
needed. The changes in this rule would allow the NPS to manage its 
resources and allocate taxpayer funds more efficiently and streamline 
the approval of new and expanded opportunities for use and enjoyment of 
park areas by the American public.

DATES: Comments on the proposed rule must be received by 11:59 p.m. ET 
on November 2, 2026.

ADDRESSES: Written comments: You may submit comments by one of the 
following methods:
    (1) Electronically: Go to the Federal eRulemaking Portal: <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a>. In the Search box, enter 1024-AE97, the RIN for 
this rulemaking. On the resulting page, select the Dockets tab and then 
click on the title of the rule. Next, click the ``Open for Comments'' 
box, then click the blue ``Comment'' box and follow the instructions 
for submitting comments.
    (2) By hard copy: Mail to: National Park Service Division of 
Regulations, 7206 National Seashore Lane, Berlin, MD 21811.
    Instructions: Comments will not be accepted by fax, email, or in 
any way other than those specified above. All submissions received must 
include the words ``National Park Service'' or ``NPS'' and must include 
the docket number or RIN (1024-AE97) for this rulemaking. Comments 
received may be posted without change to <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a>, 
including any personal information provided.
    Docket: For access to the docket to view the proposed rule and 
comments received, go to <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a> and search for 
``1024-AE97.'' Be sure to check the Dockets Tab, Documents Tab, and 
Comment Tab for possible results.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Megan Apgar, Regulations Program 
Specialist, National Park Service; (908) 766-6841; 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#a4d3c5d7cbfbd6c1c3d1c8c5d0cdcbcad7e4cad4d78ac3cbd2"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="057264766a5a776062706964716c6a6b76456b75762b626a73">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>. Individuals in the United States who are 
deaf, deafblind, hard of hearing, or have a speech disability may dial 
711 (TTY, TDD, or TeleBraille) to access telecommunications relay 
services. Individuals outside the United States should use the relay 
services offered within their country to make international calls to 
the point-of-contact in the United States. In compliance with the 
Providing Accountability Through Transparency Act of 2023, the plain 
language summary of the proposal is available on <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a> in the docket for this rulemaking.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Bicycle Use in Park Areas

    The NPS is responsible for administering the National Park System 
of more than 400 areas and sites that preserve America's natural and 
cultural heritage for the enjoyment of this and future generations. 
These areas and sites include national parks, national lakeshores, 
national seashores, national parkways, national battlefields, national 
monuments, national preserves, national historical parks, national 
memorials, and national recreation areas. Millions of people visit the 
National Park System each year, many of whom seek opportunities for 
recreation, access to points of interest, and connection to and from 
gateway communities.
    Bicycling is a common and popular form of access and recreation in 
park areas, providing riders of all skill levels and ages a fun and 
engaging way to experience their natural and cultural heritage. 
Socioeconomic monitoring data indicates that bicycling is the most 
popular form of active recreation within the National Park System after 
hiking and walking.\1\ Bicycling offers visitors another option for 
access and recreation in park areas with the added benefits to health 
and wellness that come from physical activity. This includes use of 
traditional bicycles and electric bicycles (e-bikes). E-bikes reduce 
the physical demands of operating a bicycle and therefore expand 
opportunities for recreation and access, particularly for those with 
limitations stemming from age, illness, disability or fitness, and in 
more challenging environments, such as high altitudes or hilly terrain. 
Bicycling in any form helps relieve vehicle congestion on roads and in 
parking areas. It also can mitigate some of the negative impacts motor 
vehicles have on resources, such as air, light, and noise pollution, 
collisions and other disturbances to wildlife, and wear on aging 
infrastructure. Improvements to facilities, such as new or modified 
bicycle trails, and related opportunities for riding can support 
economies in gateway communities by attracting visitors and supporting 
local businesses such as bicycle shops, sports stores, and restaurants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ See 2024 Socioeconomic Research of National Park Service 
Visitors: Report on 2024 Data Collection (NPS Datastore--2024 
Socioeconomic Research of National Park Service Visitors: Report on 
2024 Data Collection, last visited May 21, 2026).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Policy and Regulatory Framework

    On February 19, 2025, President Trump signed Executive Order 14219, 
``Ensuring Lawful Governance and Implementing the President's 
`Department of Government Efficiency' Deregulatory Initiative.'' This 
Executive Order directs Agency heads to identify regulations that are 
based on anything other than the best reading of the underlying 
statutory authority or prohibition. On July 3, 2025, President Trump 
signed Executive Order 14314, ``Making America Beautiful Again by 
Improving Our National Parks.'' This Executive Order directs the 
Secretary of the Interior to review all of the Department's recreation 
access rules and take steps to rescind any that unnecessarily restrict 
recreation in national parks.
    NPS regulations in 36 CFR 4.30 establish procedural requirements 
for designating trails for bicycle use in park areas. These regulations 
require the NPS to prepare an environmental assessment (EA) or an 
environmental impact statement (EIS) that evaluates the potential 
impacts of various actions, whether or not an EA or EIS would be 
required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). 42 U.S.C. 
4321 et seq. Such actions that require an EA or EIS in every case 
include designation of existing trails that do not require any 
construction or significant modification to accommodate bicycle use, 
development of new trails, trail construction activities (such as 
clearing brush, cutting trees, excavation, or surface treatment), and 
the authorization of new trails for bicycle use. The regulations 
require the NPS to provide the public with at least 30 days to review 
and comment on an EA, if prepared. These requirements conflict with 
Federal law and policy for the reasons given below.
    Categorical exclusions are classes of actions that a Federal agency 
has determined do not have a significant effect on the human 
environment and therefore do not need to be evaluated in an EA or EIS. 
Categorical exclusions are a valid compliance pathway under NEPA and 
apply to a substantial number and type of Federal actions. Existing NPS 
bicycle regulations, however, do not allow the NPS to use categorical 
exclusions for the actions identified in the regulations even if doing 
so would be appropriate under NEPA. For example, the NPS recently

[[Page 56097]]

adopted a categorical exclusion from the Federal Highway Administration 
that covers ``construction of bicycle and pedestrian lands, paths, and 
facilities.'' \2\ The NPS cannot use this categorical exclusion, 
however, for the construction of new bicycle trails because of the 
regulatory requirement to prepare an EA or EIS. In general, the NPS is 
forced to conduct levels of review with resulting delays that may not 
be justified by the scope and potential environmental effects of the 
actions under consideration.\3\ Delays can complicate coordination with 
the development and construction of larger trail networks outside of a 
System unit that will connect to park trails, which increases access to 
and from gateway communities.\4\ The NPS must use administrative 
resources preparing EAs or EISs when those documents may not otherwise 
be required by Federal law. This is unnecessary and results in an 
opportunity cost for the American taxpayer because the NPS cannot use 
such resources, including, for example, staff time and contractor fees, 
to accomplish other management actions that benefit the public, such as 
improving facilities that provide essential visitor services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ See 90 FR 24645 adopting the categorical exclusion on June 
11, 2025; and DOI NEPA Handbook (February 2026), Appendix 2, Section 
16.1.G(4).
    \3\ The NPS acknowledged this in 2012 when it published the 
final rule for the existing regulations by stating that ``[w]hen 
trails are sustainably located, designed, and constructed, impacts 
[from bicycle use] are normally insignificant.'' 77 FR 39931 (July 
6, 2012). The final rule went on to say that categorical exclusions 
are precluded because ``there may be cases where impacts are 
significant, including soil erosion, safety, and conflicts with 
other users.'' Id. If impacts may be significant, however, the NPS 
would be required to prepare an EA or EIS anyway under NEPA.
    \4\ For example, the Marquette River Greenway will run through 
Indiana Dunes National Park. For more information, see <a href="https://www.in.gov/nirpc/transportation/the-marquette-greenway-project-site/">https://www.in.gov/nirpc/transportation/the-marquette-greenway-project-site/</a> 
(last visited March 23, 2026).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The requirement to provide at least 30 days of public comment on an 
EA conflicts with Departmental policy set forth in 516 DM 1--U.S. 
Department of the Interior Handbook of NEPA Implementing Procedures 
(the Handbook). Appendix 1, Section 1 of the Handbook states that NEPA 
does not require public involvement when a bureau prepares an EA. The 
Responsible Official has discretion to determine whether to involve the 
public, when to involve the public, and what kind of public involvement 
is most appropriate. The Handbook states that public comment periods, 
if offered, should generally not be more than 30 days. The regulatory 
requirement to provide the public with at least 30 days to comment on 
an EA conflicts with the Handbook's policy providing the superintendent 
with discretion to determine whether public involvement is appropriate, 
and with its policy on the duration of any comment periods that are 
offered.
    In brief, existing NPS regulations prevent the NPS from using 
categorical exclusions under NEPA and mandate public involvement in EA 
preparation that is not required by NEPA and conflicts with 
Departmental policy. Accordingly, these regulatory requirements are not 
based on the best reading of NEPA--both on its face and as implemented 
by Departmental policy--and should be rescinded consistent with the 
direction in E.O. 14219.
    In addition to the requirements discussed above, the NPS believes 
that other requirements in the existing regulations are unnecessary and 
should be rescinded for the reasons given below.
    Before the NPS takes any of the actions that require an EA or EIS, 
it also must prepare a park planning document that addresses bicycle 
use on the existing or new trail under consideration. This planning 
document must evaluate (1) the suitability of the trail surface and 
soil conditions for accommodating bicycle use, including any 
maintenance, minor rehabilitation or armoring that is necessary to 
upgrade the trail to sustainable condition; (2) life cycle maintenance 
costs; (3) safety considerations; (4) methods to prevent or minimize 
user conflict; (5) methods to protect natural and cultural resources 
and mitigate impacts; and (6) integration with commercial services and 
alternative transportation systems (if applicable). These requirements 
are inconsistent with the NPS's established framework for planning and 
are redundant with compliance actions required by NEPA.
    The NPS planning framework is designed to be flexible and give 
superintendents discretion to determine how to meet legal and policy 
planning requirements, including what types of plans are necessary, 
when they should be prepared, and what should be evaluated. This design 
allows superintendents to allocate administrative resources 
efficiently. Requiring the superintendent to prepare a planning 
document before taking any of the actions listed in the regulations and 
then to evaluate the same items in the planning document regardless of 
the scope and magnitude of the proposed action requires the NPS to 
expend administrative resources in manner that may not create 
commensurate value for the American public. For example, 
superintendents and regional offices may be required to assign 
personnel and spend time and funds preparing a park planning document 
before allowing bicycles on an existing paved trail of minimal length 
that would require no modification or construction to accommodate 
bicycles, such as a 20-foot paved path connecting a parking lot with a 
visitor center. The only way to save the administrative resources that 
would be used on a planning document for other management actions is to 
take no action regarding bicycle use on the trail. The result is that 
the public is denied a new opportunity for recreation and access that 
would otherwise be allowed as an appropriate use of the park area. The 
NPS believes that superintendents and regional offices should have 
discretion to prepare planning documents when necessary given the scope 
and potential effects of the proposed action.
    To the extent that a proposed action warrants evaluation of the 
items listed in the existing regulations, such as construction of 
multi-use trail network in a backcountry area, it is likely the NPS 
would prepare an EA or EIS and evaluate those items through the NEPA 
compliance process.\5\ This would be consistent with Departmental 
policy. Appendix 1, Section 4 of the Handbook states that the 
description of alternatives in an EA or EIS may include a description 
of project maintenance, estimated costs, and modifications of existing 
facilities. Part 1, Section 1.2 of the Handbook states that effects on 
public health and safety should be considered in evaluating the degree 
of effects of a proposed action or alternatives, and so too should 
economic effects and effects on the quality of life of the American 
people, which could include how an action would integrate with 
commercial services and alternative transportation systems. Part 6, 
Section 6.1 of the Handbook defines effects or impacts to include 
ecological effects (such as effects on natural resources) and cultural 
and economic effects. Part 1, Section 1.3 of the Handbook states that 
NEPA requires agencies to consider reasonable mitigation measures. 
Accordingly, compliance with NEPA likely will result in the evaluation 
of the

[[Page 56098]]

items listed in the regulations, but only when the potential effects of 
the proposed action on the human environment justify doing so pursuant 
to Federal law and policy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \5\ The NPS acknowledged this in 2012 when it published the 
final rule for the existing regulations by stating that ``[m]ost 
NEPA requirements are compatible with or identical to requirements 
for sound management planning.'' 77 FR 29928 (July 6, 2012). The 
final rule commends the potential efficiency of using one document 
to satisfy the requirements to prepare a park planning document and 
an EA or EIS, but neither of those requirements need to be in the 
regulations in the first place.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The existing regulations also require the NPS to develop and 
construct new trails in accordance with NPS sustainable trail design 
principles and guidelines. The final rule published in 2012 that 
established this requirement discusses the importance of sustainable 
trails in backcountry areas. 77 FR 39929 (July 6, 2012). This 
discussion identifies potential impacts to resources from backcountry 
trail use and offers recommendations for mitigating those impacts by 
ensuring that trails are sustainable. The discussion cites to several 
laws, policies, and reference materials, some of which are now many 
years old and no longer accessible at the source website in the 
rule.\6\ This type of information may be useful to superintendents, 
project managers, and others involved in trail design and development, 
but requiring that superintendents adhere to ambiguous ``design 
principles and guidelines'' in regulatory text offers little direction 
or benefit to the American public. This requirement has even less 
meaning when superintendents consider bicycle use on trails in 
frontcountry areas, which the NPS did not address in the trail 
sustainability discussion in 2012. This omission was understandable 
because the types of impacts that might occur from the use of 
unsustainable trails in primitive, undeveloped areas, such as 
compaction and erosion of trail tread materials, in most cases are not 
possible from the use of trails in developed areas, many of which are 
paved. The NPS maintains established processes for design and 
construction of various types of facilities and infrastructure across 
the National Park System, including trails of all types.\7\ These 
processes are subject to their own policies, compliance requirements 
and technical standards. Because these processes are managed under 
separate NPS authorities and procedures, decisions about physical 
design and construction are not part of this rule. The primary purpose 
of NPS regulations is to manage visitor use of park areas.\8\ It 
follows that NPS regulations for bicycle use should focus on visitor 
use of trails, not the design or construction of them before they are 
designated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \6\ The final rule cites to a 1991 document titled ``Developing 
Sustainable Mountain Trail Corridors: An Overview, National Park 
Service'' and another document titled ``Guide to Sustainable 
Mountain Trails'' that was published by the NPS in partnership with 
the Colorado Outdoor Training Initiative in 2007.
    \7\ See information about the NPS Park Planning, Facilities, and 
Lands Directorate on <a href="https://www.nps.gov/orgs/1640/index.htm">https://www.nps.gov/orgs/1640/index.htm</a> (last 
visited March 9, 2026).
    \8\ See 36 CFR 1.2(d) stating that NPS regulations do not apply 
to administrative activities conducted by the NPS or its agents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In addition to the requirements to prepare an EA or EIS, and the 
requirement to prepare a park planning document, the existing 
regulations also require the superintendent to prepare a written 
determination that applies another set of criteria for evaluating the 
effects of bicycle use on trails and administrative roads. 
Administrative roads are open to motor vehicle use by the NPS for 
administrative purposes but not open to motor vehicle use by the 
public. Superintendents must determine that bicycle use is consistent 
with protection of the park area's natural, scenic and aesthetic 
values, safety considerations and management objectives, and will not 
disturb wildlife or park resources. Regional directors must concur with 
written determinations for bicycle use on trails. Written 
determinations for existing trails and for new trails within developed 
areas must be published in the Federal Register for 30 days of public 
comment. The items that must be evaluated in the written determination 
are confusingly similar to, but not the same, as the items that must be 
evaluated in the park planning document. For this reason, the 
justifications explained above for rescinding the park planning 
document requirements also support rescinding the written determination 
requirements. Requiring superintendents to prepare a written 
determination in every case, even for decisions to allow bicycles on 
administrative roads and trails that would result in minor or 
negligible impacts to resources or visitors, forces the NPS to dedicate 
administrative time and cost that could be put to better uses. The 
administrative burden is even worse for proposals to allow bicycle use 
on existing trails and on new trails in developed areas, which require 
publication of the written determination in the Federal Register, 
consideration of public comments, and concurrence by the regional 
director, no matter the scope or magnitude of the potential effects of 
the action. In addition, relying on the regulatory definition of 
``developed area'' can create additional illogical outcomes, because 
some areas may be developed in the ordinary sense of the word but not 
within a designated development or historic zone on a land management 
and use map.\9\ In such areas any new trail, no matter the scope or 
magnitude of its impacts, will require a special regulation.\10\ 
Similar to the items that must be evaluated in a park planning 
document, the items that must be evaluated in a written determination 
likely would be evaluated in an EA or EIS if preparation of those 
documents is required under NEPA given the scope and potential effects 
of the action.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \9\ NPS regulations at 36 CFR 1.4 define ``developed area'' as 
roads, parking areas, picnic areas, campgrounds, or other 
structures, facilities or lands located within development and 
historic zones depicted on the park area land management and use 
map. Emphasis added.
    \10\ NPS regulations at 36 CFR 4.30(e)(2) require promulgation 
of a special regulation prior to developing, constructing, or 
authorizing new trails outside of developed areas for bicycle use.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    A final requirement in the regulations prevents the NPS from 
allowing bicycle use on existing trails if the Finding of No 
Significant Impact or Record of Decision that follows the preparation 
of an EA or EIS concludes that such action may have a significant 
impact on the environment. It is not clear why this requirement applies 
to existing trails but not to new trails. The distinction between an 
existing and a new trail ceases after the new trail is built, at which 
point the potential impacts of allowing bicycle use on the trail can be 
the same. Another problem is that this requirement establishes a 
substantive standard for allowable impacts that is different from the 
non-impairment standard in the NPS Organic Act and the standard in NPS 
Management Policies that prevents the NPS from allowing unacceptable 
impacts from visitor use. See 54 U.S.C. 100101 and NPS Management 
Policies 2006, Section 1.4.7.1. There is no basis for applying a 
standard for impacts from bicycle use that is different from the 
standards that apply to impacts from other visitor activities. 
Superintendents should follow established NPS policy about appropriate 
use of park areas when making decisions about bicycle use. Additional 
confusion may arise because the significance standard used in the 
regulations refers to specific determinations made in the NEPA 
compliance process, but the regulations use this standard as a 
substantive limitation on decision-making, while NEPA purposefully does 
not. NEPA is a procedural statute requiring Federal agencies to 
evaluate the environmental impacts of proposed actions, but does not 
mandate specific outcomes or limit agency decision-making.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \11\ See Seven County Infrastructure Coalition v. Eagle County, 
605 U.S. 168, 169 (2025) (``Otherwise stated, NPS `does not mandate 
particular results, but simply prescribes the necessary process' for 
an agency's environmental review of a project.'' (quoting Roberston 
v. Methow Valley Citizens Council, 490 U.S. 332, 350 (1989)).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 56099]]

    None of the procedural requirements that would be rescinded by this 
rule exist in general regulations that address other types of visitor 
recreation and access in park areas.\12\ These include regulations for 
designating lands and waters for operating or using aircraft (36 CFR 
2.17), routes and water surfaces for the use of snowmobiles (36 CFR 
2.18), areas for using human-powered coasting devices such as roller 
skates, skateboards, and scooters (36 CFR 2.20), waters for the use of 
personal watercraft (PWC) (36 CFR 3.9), routes and areas for off-road 
vehicle (ORV) use (36 CFR 4.10), and locations for the operation of 
powered micromobility devices, such as e-scooters (36 CFR 4.32). None 
of them address the design, development, or construction of routes, 
trails, paths, traffic barriers, or other physical assets that are used 
for the visitor activities and uses described. Some of these 
regulations address devices similar to traditional bicycles, such as 
the regulations for human-powered coating devices, and similar to e-
bikes, such as the regulations for powered micromobility devices. 
Others manage devices such as aircraft, snowmobiles, PWCs, and ORVs 
that have the potential to impact resources and visitors well beyond 
what is possible from bicycles and e-bikes due to their weight, speed 
of operation, use of internal combustion engines, and other 
characteristics of use. Some of these regulations require notice and 
comment rulemaking to ensure there is public involvement before certain 
uses are allowed. Notice and comment rulemaking is required to 
designate any location for the use of aircraft, snowmobiles, PWC, and 
ORVs. These requirements are justified because these types of 
activities have greater potential for impacts no matter the location. 
Rulemaking is required before allowing powered micromobility devices in 
locations that have never been improved by artificial or processed 
materials such as paving or gravel. This requirement is justified 
because the use of powered micromobility devices in these locations has 
potential for greater impacts than use in other locations, such as 
paved pathways.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \12\ NPS regulations that govern the gathering of plants or 
plant parts by federally recognized Indian tribes require the 
preparation of an EA. 36 CFR 2.6(d)(2). The NPS does not consider 
this activity to be visitor recreation or access due to the special 
relationship between the NPS and federally-recognized Indian tribes, 
which are sovereign governments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In summary, the NPS believes that the requirements in 36 CFR 4.30 
discussed above unnecessarily restrict recreation and access by making 
it more difficult than needed to authorize administrative roads and 
trails for bicycle use. Therefore they should be rescinded consistent 
with the direction in Executive Order 14314. This proposed rule would 
allow the NPS to manage its resources and allocate taxpayer funds more 
efficiently and streamline the approval of new and expanded 
opportunities for use and enjoyment of park areas by the American 
public. Key elements of the proposed rule are discussed below.

Proposed Rule

    Identifying new opportunities for responsible outdoor recreation in 
park areas is a priority for the Trump Administration and the NPS. This 
includes identifying new and expanded opportunities for bicycle use 
where appropriate. The proposed rule would simplify how the NPS allows 
bicycle and e-bike use in park areas for the benefit of the American 
public. Bicycles and e-bikes would be allowed on park roads and in 
parking areas that are otherwise open for motor vehicle use by the 
general public. This would not change the status quo for traditional 
bicycles, but it would for e-bikes by removing the need for 
superintendents to take affirmative action to allow them in those 
locations by designation. Setting the same baseline for the use of all 
forms of bicycles on roads and in parking areas would simplify 
administration and make the regulations easier to understand. The 
superintendent would have authority to designate other locations, 
including administrative roads and trails, for bicycle and e-bike use 
except that rulemaking in the Federal Register would be required to 
allow bicycles or e-bikes in two circumstances. First, rulemaking would 
be required if the designation would be highly controversial or 
otherwise significant according to the criteria in paragraph (b) of 36 
CFR 1.5.\13\ Second, rulemaking would be required before bicycles or e-
bikes are allowed in locations that have never been improved by 
artificial or processed materials. Artificial or processed materials 
include gravel, asphalt, concrete, wood boards, soil cement, and resin-
based material. Rulemaking would not be required for locations with 
surfaces composed of these materials at present, nor for locations that 
have a natural surface at present but in the past were altered or 
improved by artificial or processed materials, such as trails located 
on top of old rail lines. The purpose of the rulemaking requirements in 
this rule is to ensure public involvement in decision-making that has 
more potential for impacts to park resources, values, and visitors, or 
when stakeholders such as gateway communities have strong viewpoints 
about potential designations. Related to trail characteristics, the NPS 
seeks specific comment from the public about criteria that could be 
used to determine whether rulemaking is required. An example is whether 
rulemaking should not be required to designate certain locations that 
have never been improved by artificial or processed materials but that 
have other characteristics that might lessen the potential for impacts, 
such as public beaches.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \13\ Rulemaking is required for an action ``which is of a 
nature, magnitude and duration that will result in a significant 
alteration in the public use pattern of the park area, adversely 
affect the park's natural, aesthetic, scenic or cultural values, 
require a long-term or significant modification in the resource 
management objectives of the unit . . . .'' 36 CFR 1.5(b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The proposed rule would maintain several provisions in the existing 
regulations that do not need revision. The definitions of ``bicycle'' 
and ``electric bicycle'' in 36 CFR 1.4 would remain the same. So would 
the existing prohibition on possessing a bicycle or e-bike in a 
wilderness area established by Federal statute and other restrictions 
on the operation of a bicycle or e-bike that promote visitor 
safety.\14\ The rule would maintain an existing prohibition on using 
the electric motor to exclusively propel an e-bike for an extended 
period of time, except where use of motor vehicles is allowed. This 
only affects Class-2 e-bikes and helps ensure that they are used for 
access and recreation in a similar manner to traditional bicycles. The 
rule would continue to apply state law to the use of bicycles and e-
bikes except as provided in NPS regulations. Finally, the rule would 
maintain the authority given to superintendents to establish bicycle or 
e-bike use limitations, restrictions, conditions, and closures after 
consideration of public health and safety, resource protection, and 
other management activities and objectives. This rule would add a new 
provision, however, clarifying that permanent closures of park roads 
and parking areas that are otherwise open for motor vehicle use by the 
general public, or of administrative roads, trails, and other

[[Page 56100]]

locations that are designated by rulemaking, must be promulgated as 
special regulations for the applicable System unit. The only exception 
would be for closures of park roads and parking areas that exist under 
state law. This exception would be compatible with the NPS's general 
adoption of state traffic laws in 36 CFR 4.2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \14\ For example, 36 CFR 4.30(h)(5) prohibits operating a 
bicycle while consuming an alcoholic beverage or carrying in hand an 
open container of an alcoholic beverage, and is applied to e-bikes 
in 36 CFR 4.30(i)(5). As another example, 36 CFR 4.12 requires 
compliance with the directions of a traffic control device. It is 
applied to bicycles in 36 CFR 4.30(g)(1) and to e-bikes in 36 CFR 
4.30(i)(5).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Compliance With Other Laws, Executive Orders and Department Policy

Regulatory Planning and Review (Executive Orders 12866 and 14192)

    This rule has been determined to be not significant for purposes of 
Executive Order 12866. This rule is an E.O. 14192 deregulatory action. 
The NPS expects this rule would result in net economic benefits due to 
reduced administrative costs. Administrative costs associated with the 
requirements in the existing regulations to prepare a planning 
document, an EA or EIS, and a written determination would be eliminated 
in situations where such actions are not warranted.

Regulatory Flexibility Act

    This proposed rule will not have a significant economic effect on a 
substantial number of small entities under the Regulatory Flexibility 
Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.). No small entities would be directly 
regulated by this rule, which would modify existing NPS regulations to 
simplify how the NPS allows traditional and electric bicycle use in 
park areas. The proposed changes would remove unnecessary requirements, 
reduce regulatory burden, and allow the NPS to streamline the approval 
of new and expanded opportunities for use and enjoyment of park areas 
by the American public. While the changes in this rule are procedural 
in nature, they could result in a small increase in recreational 
visitation, thereby benefitting nearby small businesses through 
increased visitor spending. This proposed rule would not generate new 
costs for small businesses, organizations, or governmental 
jurisdictions, nor would it impose fees, operational requirements, 
training, recordkeeping, or other compliance burdens on small 
businesses or organizations. It is not expected to have adverse 
economic effects on any sector, including small entities. For these 
reasons, the NPS certifies that this rule will not have a significant 
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities; therefore, a 
regulatory flexibility analysis is not required.

Congressional Review Act

    This proposed rule is not a major rule under 5 U.S.C. 804(2). This 
proposed rule:
    (a) Would not have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million 
or more.
    (b) Would not cause a major increase in costs or prices for 
consumers, individual industries, Federal, State, or local government 
agencies, or geographic regions.
    (c) Would not have significant adverse effects on competition, 
employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or the ability of 
U.S.-based enterprises to compete with foreign-based enterprises.

Unfunded Mandates Reform Act

    This proposed rule would not impose an unfunded mandate on State, 
local, or Tribal governments or the private sector of more than $100 
million per year. This proposed rule would not have a significant or 
unique effect on State, local or Tribal governments, or the private 
sector. It addresses public use of national park lands and imposes no 
requirements on other agencies or governments. A statement containing 
the information required by the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (2 U.S.C. 
1531 et seq.) is not required.

Takings (E.O. 12630)

    This proposed rule would not effect a taking of private property or 
otherwise have takings implications under E.O. 12630. A takings 
implication assessment is not required.

Federalism (E.O. 13132)

    Under the criteria in section 1 of E.O. 13132, this proposed rule 
would not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the 
preparation of a Federalism summary impact statement. This rule would 
only affect use of federally administered lands. It would have no 
direct effects on other areas. A Federalism summary impact statement is 
not required.

Civil Justice Reform (E.O. 12988)

    This proposed rule complies with the requirements of E.O. 12988. 
This proposed rule:
    (a) Meets the criteria of section 3(a) requiring that all 
regulations be reviewed to eliminate errors and ambiguity and be 
written to minimize litigation; and
    (b) Meets the criteria of section 3(b)(2) requiring that all 
regulations be written in clear language and contain clear legal 
standards.

Consultation With Indian Tribes (E.O. 13175 and Department Policy)

    The Department of the Interior strives to strengthen its 
government-to-government relationship with Indian Tribes through a 
commitment to consultation with Indian Tribes and recognition of their 
right to self-governance and Tribal sovereignty. The NPS has evaluated 
this proposed rule under the criteria in E.O. 13175 and under the 
Department's Tribal consultation policy and has determined that Tribal 
consultation is not required because this rule will have no substantial 
direct effect on federally recognized Indian Tribes and that 
consultation under the Department's tribal consultation policy is not 
required.

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.)

    This rule contains no new information collections. All information 
collections require approval under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 
(44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.). The NPS may not conduct or sponsor, and you 
are not required to respond to a collection of information, unless it 
displays a currently valid Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 
control number.

National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA; 42 U.S.C. 4321 et 
seq.)

    This rule does not constitute a major Federal action significantly 
affecting the quality of the human environment. A detailed statement 
under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) is not 
required because the rule is covered by categorical exclusions. This 
rule does not involve any of the extraordinary circumstances listed in 
43 CFR 46.215 that would require further analysis under NEPA. The NPS 
has determined the change in the rule that would allow e-bikes on park 
roads and parking areas that are otherwise open for motor vehicle use 
by the general public, without the need for superintendents to take 
affirmative action to allow them in those locations by designation, is 
categorically excluded under Appendix 2, Section 12.5.D(4) of the 
Handbook, which covers minor changes in programs and regulations 
pertaining to visitor activities. The NPS has determined that all other 
changes in this rule are categorically excluded under 43 CFR 46.210(i), 
which covers minor policies, directives, regulations, and guidelines: 
that are of an administrative, financial, legal, technical, or 
procedural nature; or whose environmental effects are too broad, 
speculative, or conjectural to

[[Page 56101]]

lend themselves to meaningful analysis and will later be subject to the 
NEPA process, either collectively or case-by-case. The NPS will 
document the application of these categorical exclusions to this rule.

Effects on the Energy Supply (E.O. 13211)

    This proposed rule is not a significant energy action under the 
definition in E.O. 13211; this proposed rule is not likely to have a 
significant adverse effect on the supply, distribution, or use of 
energy, and this proposed rule has not otherwise been designated by the 
Administrator of OIRA as a significant energy action. A Statement of 
Energy Effects is not required.

List of Subjects in 36 CFR Part 4

    National Parks, Traffic regulations.

    In consideration of the foregoing, the National Park Service 
proposes to amend 36 CFR part 4 as set forth below:

PART 4--VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC SAFETY

0
1. The authority citation for part 4 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  54 U.S.C. 100101, 100751, 320102.


0
2. Revise and republish Sec.  4.30 as follows:


Sec.  4.30  Bicycles.

    (a) Park roads and parking areas. The use of bicycles and electric 
bicycles is allowed on park roads and in parking areas that are 
otherwise open for motor vehicle use by the general public.
    (b) Other locations. The use of bicycles and electric bicycles is 
allowed in other locations designated by the superintendent after 
notice is provided using one or more of the methods described in Sec.  
1.7 of this chapter. Locations must be designated by rulemaking in the 
Federal Register when the designation would meet the criteria in 
paragraph (b) of Sec.  1.5 of this chapter. Rulemaking in the Federal 
Register also is required before bicycles or electric bicycles are 
allowed in locations that have never been improved by artificial or 
processed materials. Artificial or processed materials include, but are 
not limited to, gravel, asphalt, concrete, steel rail lines, wood 
boards, soil cement, and resin-based material.
    (c) Closures and other use restrictions. (1) A superintendent may 
limit or restrict or impose conditions on bicycle use or electric 
bicycle use, or may close any park road, parking area, administrative 
road, trail, or other location, or a portion thereof, to bicycle or 
electric bicycle use, or terminate such condition, closure, limit or 
restriction after:
    (i) Taking into consideration public health and safety, natural and 
cultural resource protection, and other management activities and 
objectives; and
    (ii) Notifying the public through one or more methods listed in 
Sec.  1.7 of this chapter.
    (2) A closure of all or a portion of a park road or parking area 
that is otherwise open for motor vehicle use by the general public, or 
all or a portion of an administrative road, trail, or other location 
designated by rulemaking, may not remain in effect on a permanent basis 
unless it is promulgated as a special regulation, except that a special 
regulation is not required for a closure of all or a portion of a park 
road or parking area that exists under state law.
    (d) Prohibited acts. The following are prohibited:
    (1) Operating a bicycle or an electric bicycle off of park roads 
and parking areas in locations not designated for their use in 
accordance with this section.
    (2) Possessing a bicycle or an electric bicycle in a wilderness 
area established by Federal statute.
    (3) Operating a bicycle or an electric bicycle during periods of 
low visibility, or while traveling through a tunnel, or between sunset 
and sunrise, without exhibiting on the operator, bicycle, or electric 
bicycle a white light or reflector that is visible from a distance of 
at least 500 feet to the front and with a red light or reflector that 
is visible from at least 200 feet to the rear.
    (4) Operating a bicycle or an electric bicycle abreast of another 
bicycle or electric bicycle except where authorized by the 
superintendent.
    (5) Operating a bicycle or an electric bicycle while consuming an 
alcoholic beverage or carrying in hand an open container of an 
alcoholic beverage.
    (6) Except where use of motor vehicles by the public is allowed, 
using the electric motor exclusively to move an electric bicycle for an 
extended period of time.
    (e) Other requirements. (1) A person operating or possessing a 
bicycle or an electric bicycle is subject to the following sections of 
this part that also apply to the operation of a motor vehicle: 
Sec. Sec.  4.12, 4.13, 4.20, 4.21, 4.22, and 4.23.
    (2) Except as specified in this chapter, the use of a bicycle or an 
electric bicycle is allowed in compliance with applicable State law. 
Any act in violation of applicable State law is prohibited.

Kevin Lilly,
Principal Deputy, Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks.
[FR Doc. 2026-17902 Filed 8-31-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4312-52-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>